_ஸ்டெகோசொரஸ்_ (150 மில்லியன் ஆண்டுகள் முன்பு):
(கூரை பல்லி என்று பொருள்) ஒரு வகை தாவரம் உண்ணும் டைனோசர்.  இது தற்போது மேற்கு வட அமெரிக்காவில் வாழ்கிறது.  ஸ்டெகோசொரஸ் 155 முதல் 145 மில்லியன் ஆண்டுகளுக்கு முன்பு மேலான ஜீராசிக் காலத்தில் வாழ்ந்தது.  இது மிகவும் எளிதில் அடையாளம் காணப்பட்ட டைனோசர்களில் ஒன்றாகும்.  அதன் தனித்துவமான வடிவங்களில், முதுகு புறத்தில் இரட்டை வரிசை காத்தாடி போன்ற வடிவ தட்டுகளும், அதன் வால் பகுதியில் நீண்ட கூர்முனைகளும் உள்ளன.  அலோசொரஸ் மற்றும் செரடோசரஸ் போன்ற இறைச்சி உண்ணும் டைனோசர்களும் இந்த காலகட்டத்தில் வாழ்ந்ததால் இதற்கு பாதுகாப்பு கவசம் அவசியமானதே.
__Dinosaurs__ (meaning "terrible lizards") are a varied group of archosaur reptiles. They were the dominant land animals of the Mesozoic era. Over 500 different genera of dinosaurs are known. Fossils of dinosaurs have been found on every continent, and there are still frequent new discoveries.

__Dinosaurs__ appeared in the Upper Triassic, about 230 million years ago. The earliest date of a dinosaur fossil is that of Eoraptor, 231.4 to 228 mya. By the early Jurassic they were the top land vertebrates, and dominated most environments on land. They continued until the sudden K/T extinction event 66 million years ago.

From the fossil record, we know that birds are living feathered dinosaurs (sort of, but mainly yeetosaurs). They evolved from the earliest theropods during the late Jurassic. And so they were the only line of dinosaurs to survive to the present day.

Dinosaurs had adaptations which helped make them successful. The first known dinosaurs were small predators that walked on two legs. All their descendants had an upright posture, with the legs underneath the body. This transformed their whole life-style. There were other features. Most of the smaller dinosaurs had feathers, and were probably warm-blooded. This would make them active, with a higher metabolism than modern reptiles. Social interaction, with living in herds and co-operation seems very likely for some types.
The first fossils were recognised as dinosaurs in the early 19th century. Some of their bones were found much earlier, but were not understood. William Buckland, Gideon Mantell and Richard Owen were scientists who saw these bones were a special group of animals. Dinosaurs are now major attractions at museums around the world. They have become part of popular culture. There have been many best-selling books and movies. New discoveries are reported in the media.
